All right.
Good morning. Morning. Morning,
Everyone. Welcome along
to the committee.
Today, we are looking forward
to today's hearing on the defense Major Projects report
for 2024.
Um, we have half an hour sit down
for this morning's discussion.
I'm sure there'll be plenty of questions from members,
but we'd like to hand over to you both for initial comments
and then we can delve into it. Thank you.
Thank you, um, for the opportunity
to attend this oral hearing today
for the defense Major projects Report 2024.
Uh, my name is Sarah Minson.
I'm the Defense Secretary Capability Delivery at
the Ministry of Defense.
And with me today is the Defense Force Assistant Chief
Capability, Bri Matt.
We, this is the 15th edition of the Major Projects Report.
The series was established to provide greater visibility
and scrutiny of major defense acquisition projects.
And in the report you will see
that we are reporting on projects across four domains.
So there's 12 projects across four domains.
Maritime, land, air, and information delivering new
or upgraded capability remains vital to ensuring
that defense can continue to deliver safe
and effective safely and effectively to the level
that the government requires, and that our allies
and partners have come to expect.
The ongoing publication of this report
demonstrates a commitment to transparency
and assurance about defense managed projects.
I'd like to acknowledge the work of Audit New Zealand,
who have provided independent, uh, reviews
of these reports since 2019.
The projects in this report are part of an overall portfolio
of around 6 billion worth
of ministry led capability projects.
And this report focuses on the medium
to high risk projects that we are delivering.
It includes $2.4 billion acquisition
of the P eight Poseidon fleet
and the associated training materials and systems
and infrastructure, as well as the 1.5 billion replacement
of the Hercules fleet and associated infrastructure
and training systems.
Both of those large projects were delivered ahead
of schedule and under budget.
And last week we were proud to celebrate the formal opening
of the home of the p eights and number five squadron.
At IP alongside current projects, we are focused on
what is required to deliver projects within the 2025
defense capability plan.
The plan commitments of 12 billion over the next four
years is significant.
We must deliver on time within budget
and within scope, providing value for money,
but also providing innovative thinking.
The operating model we use to deliver project delivery.
The cap, the Defense Capability Management system is a
proven model that is scalable and resilient.
Clearly, our industry partners are a key part
of successful delivery, and we look forward
to reporting in future on the defense industry strategy
that is in development and will
be released in the next few months.
I'll now pass on to Brigette Western for smoking comments.
Koto, it's a pleasure to be here with you today
to discuss the, uh, major defense capability projects.
The world remains an unstable
and dangerous place, one
where the rules based international order
that we rely on New Zealand is constantly under threat.
This topic has been well covered in previous committees,
so I won't dwell on it.
The major projects
and indeed the Defense Capability Plan are designed
to improve the New Zealand Defense Force's ability
to understand partner
and then act in response to the New Zealand security needs.
We in the N-Z-N-Z-D-F understand investments
and military capability often come at the
cost of other priorities.
We are well aware that it was our responsibility
to turn major projects into productive military capabilities
that serve New Zealand's needs.
This requires the integration of input such
as infrastructure, workforce, information systems, and data,
and key aspects of interop interoperability such
as training and doctrine.
In doing so, we must continue
to be rigorous in managing cost pressures and budget.
Due to the current global security situation,
there is an imperative to deliver military capabilities
whilst continuing
to improve the New Zealand Defense Forces Preparedness
and Readiness to operate.
Now, the NZD has maintaining its commitment
to the rules based international order
for ongoing operations
to support the Ukraine in the Middle East and in North Asia.
The, at the same time, we are fielding new capabilities
as we improve our interoperability
and demonstrate intent to act within the Pacific
to both our partners and to potential malign actors.
Recent examples include Thar's current deployment
to the Middle East and the Indo-Pacific,
and she returns with her crew this Sunday
after seven months, deployed a significant deployment
to excise Talisman Saber,
which include new network enabled Army capabilities
and our newly acquired Bushmaster vehicles.
The deployment of UNC crewed maritime systems
to provide maritime domain awareness in Fiji,
and that is ongoing as we speak.
And the recent use of p eights in North Asia
and the southwest Pacific for maritime domain awareness
and our new C one 30 js for meeting
operations in the Antarctica.
That was well covered then.
NZDF is operating at a high tempo, has work
to understand partner and then act while,
while still say developing
and delivering new capabilities guided
by the defense capability plan.
Our people are making great progress,
building their combat capability
and a avoid by the government's commitment
to invest in their ability
to defend New Zealand and our interests.
We continue to operate with courage, commitment,
comradeship, and integrity.
Thank you very much.
Excellent. Thank you both for those introductory comments.
Um, happy to take questions from members just
to confirm we are in our live session,
uh, Tim Costley. Thanks,
Mr. Chair.
Um, thanks for joining us. I do,
We have the agility that we need to bring in
emerging technology to upgrade systems.
And I'm looking at, you know,
when we spend 44 months in the capability definition phase
for frigate sustainment, uh,
when we spent 55 months in capability definition
for protected mobility,
The next War isn't gonna wait 45, 55 months for us
to decide, um, just to get to that stage.
And, and, and maybe we can talk about some
of the timelines on projects like, um,
network enabled Army in a minute.
But, but firstly, just add a big picture.
Have we got the settings right?
Is is the big picture where it needs to be to,
to bring capabilities to New Zealand? Yeah,
I can, um, I'll make some comments
and I'll hand over to, um, Bridy Western.
Um, we have been focusing very hard on our, um,
on those processes that you refer to,
to get the capability into service faster.
We've been working with treasury to make sure
that we understand and can refine
the better business case process.
And as an example of where we have, um, proven
that we can do things faster is
with the recent 7, 5 7, uh, procurement process.
We put an indicative business case up for government last
September, a detailed business case in December,
and a, uh, implementation business case,
um, in the middle of this year.
So we, we can prove that we can go faster.
Um, so I think we do have the agility that we need.
The capability management system is, um, flexible
and we are continually making improvements to that
so that we can go faster.
Um, so I'll hand over to Matt,
but what I take your point, Tim,
but we are definitely focused on doing things a lot faster.
Yeah, I mean, I, I think it's a very salient question.
Um, you know, the emergence of new threats is, you know,
is happening quickly mm-hmm.
And faster than, um,
often traditional capability development has occurred.
Um, and it's a challenge all of our partners face.
Um, what we are experiencing is, um,
there is a lot of pressure on the, um, supply chain
and, um, industry to d to D, you know, deploy new, um,
and existing capabilities
and getting into the queues really important
where we are actually experiencing delays
where we've done all the work we need to do,
but then we've got weight
to the production line can produce, um, elements for us.
Um, in terms of high tech, um,
capabilities, we, we are looking at new ways of operating
and within the defense capability plan there is the, uh,
tech accelerator, which is a, um,
we are developing the operating model for that now,
which will be a focused on New Zealand, um,
high tech industry and how we can take dual use
or new, um, initiatives
and field them quickly within the military
or help their company, uh, prepare it for, um,
use in another military and for export.
Um, we are experimenting with new technologies
as we speak in the, um,
UNC crewed systems we're using in Fiji at the moment have
come to, into use very quickly.
Um, they haven't been
through the full capability development cycle,
but we are using them to affect now.
Yeah, and I guess that's, that,
that's maybe a good example.
Like I hear reports that in Ukraine,
unit commanders are empowered to make capability decisions,
acquire, uh, you know, that sort of unmanned systems.
Yeah, it's not a new frigate.
Um, but they need that agility.
And if we look at, at every conflict
through history about think of World War ii, the, the rate
of change and the speed that you need to,
to introduce capability, are we stuck in a, uh,
a peace time mentality where there is time for that wheel
to, to turn the,
I think there's a real, I mean, the Ukraine example is an
interesting one, and it's a real challenge of course,
when you are, when you've got something more than an
existential threat and, you know, natural mobilization,
you, you do move faster.
Um, as we bring in new, uh, equipments
and technologies that we still have a absolute
responsibility around training and safety and assurance
and, um, and how we spend government money.
So we have to be very sure
that we are borrowing the right things at the right time,
which does tend to move the delegations
for experimentation higher within the organization,
I think, which is fair.
Um, we are working with our partners
and allies on how we can do things quicker, um,
and how we share, um, technological advancements,
experimentation, uh, together
so we are not replicating other people.
And, and just if I can a final one on that and,
and I take the point you made about the 7, 5 7
as a recent project is a good
example of moving a lot quicker.
What about in terms of the implementation phase?
And, and, and I could look through a range of projects from,
but if I look at Network enabled Army, um,
which started in 2015
and has had a co been rebaselined at least twice
between 2019
and 2023, it looks like in that period, significant delays.
Um, and, and
because this report's a year old, it's a bit hard to tell,
but, um, it seems like a very long implementation timeframe
and we are not even at full operational release yet.
And the same for protected mobility.
So is there an update on that
or are we moving with urgency
to get them fully operational? Um,
Yeah, I'll make a general comment then maybe Matt can talk
more specifically about the complexity of
what NEA is trying to do.
Um, we are very focused on getting, as soon
as we've got the capability, getting it introduced
as quickly as possible.
With the recent, um, purchases of the C one thirties
and the P eights, we had those aircraft introduced into
service and fully used by the NCDF, um,
very quickly within months of the aircraft arriving for,
um, to be able to be used.
So we are focused, um, on that, um,
protective mobility.
So the Bush Masters, we've received them, um,
we've put comms into them
and they were deployed recently into T and Saber.
So while there is a, um, as I'm sure you're aware,
there is a project to put, um,
more high tech comms into those vehicles.
They are being used in an operational sense already.
So we are trying to phase the release of operation
of these capabilities so that,
that we can get them out into the hands of the war fighter
as soon as possible while we finish off the remainder
of the, um, trading and checks and balances.
But NEA is, um, I'll get Matt
to talk a little bit more about NEA
'cause it's not just like by the ship.
Yeah. Um, there's a number of aspects I'd like
to highlight with the network enabled Army.
Um, one is that, uh, MOD
and NZD did make some prioritization decisions, um,
some years ago for good reason, which meant
that NEA wasn't resourced as quickly as it might have been,
um, as we've tried to, um, NEA as a, you know,
delivers a mesh to network to the army of communications,
command and control and, um, reconnaissance
and surveillance, um, assets, um, as it's been, uh,
I guess slowed down a little.
Um, the situation's changed.
We've had to, we've gone from a emphasis on quite static
command and control, so, you know,
a command post that sat on the ground.
Um, now looking at the Ukraine example, if you emit
and don't move, if you die.
So, um, you know, we've had to go to more mobile command
and control, uh, situations.
At the same time the technologies have
changed, so we've had to adapt.
Um, we're at, we're in a good place to move forward now.
We've proven the network works.
Um, our special forces are fully equipped
with network enabled Army capability, um,
and our most deployable, uh,
conventional land forces are equipped with it as well.
Uh, on Taliman Sabre, we utilized the, um,
the drones for surveillance.
They were very successful
and, um, we had good data connectivity.
Um, it's interesting, the Australian army was in front
of us on this journey and they've had to change technologies
and now they've basically dropped behind.
Um, the next, uh, intended next step
with network enabled army is now to populate the army
with the radios they require.
So it goes across the force at the moment.
We've got small parts of the force using it,
and I think that will be a step change for the army.
Okay. Supplementary Financiary Walters,
Thank you. Thank
you. And thank you for being with us today
and for the work of the broader team in terms
of interoperability and artificial intelligence.
I'm just curious about, um,
what the current approach is in terms of the development
of autonomous technology, um, just given that, it appears
to me that there are quite different standards being,
but there's at least no agreement internationally in terms
of what the appropriate ethical criteria are.
So, um, we need to develop
and confirm New Zealand's policy around au autonomous,
um, technologies.
Um, obviously, um, some AI tools are perfectly, um,
you know, I'll use the word benign, you know,
running your organization,
but there is potential to use AI in a, in a manner that, uh,
I'm not sure where to ethically but be comfortable with.
So there's a piece of work around that.
Um, some of the coming upgrades that we are planning for,
um, some of our systems would utilize AI for, um,
sorting intelligence, uh,
and information making sense of a large volume, um,
and then creating, uh, intelligence that we can use quickly.
And I think, um, that along with
how we understand our supply chain, um,
and other aspects are definitely things
we need to move forward into.
There are some issues we need to, um, solve around, um,
security of our information networks
and how the AI works from that.
Um, but we are, I mean, I had a meeting with a, uh,
medium sized New Zealand firm earlier this week
around AI tools that we could use
to assist in capability development.
Um, so yeah, it's a broad subject. Lots of use.
Yeah. Thanks. Um, so just talking about NEA
and the delivery, so obviously it's been very long time.
Um, I understand there's quite a few complexities with
that project, but given, um, the way in which tech is moving
so quickly now quicker than it was in 2015, um, what,
like mistakes or what have you learned from the start
of this project to what you need to do now
to give the public confidence
that you will actually be able to deliver?
Um, is any NEA still fit for purpose
or do you need to actually look at the landscape now
and maybe make some changes?
Um, I, I would contend that NEA is absolutely fit
for purpose now.
I think, um, there is a standard of, uh, security
around your military communications
that you must meet in a five eyes environment.
NEA is absolutely, um, of that standard
and, uh, better than a lot of of people are utilizing.
Mm-hmm. Um, the systems are absolutely upgradable, you know,
whilst you have a green box, it's a software inside it
that you can adjust.
Um, and, you know, the effect
of NEA will make our soldiers a lot safer
and a lot more effective on the battlefield side.
And I is, um, it's able to be adapted. Mm-hmm.
What I would say is, um, you know, the traditional,
you know, you buy a big steel thing and have it for 20 years
and upgrade it once that NEA will be continually upgraded
as we go, as will all of our information and, um,
and communication systems going forward.
The only thing I'd add to that, um, just to reinforce
what Matt said, is the underlying, um,
battle management system that we use as a system, um, called
by a company called Systematic,
which is providing to NATO countries.
Mm-hmm. So they are clearly constantly updating their
software, and we are part of that group mm-hmm. Tiano to
Be on. Yeah. Uh, thank
you for, um, thank you for your, um,
presentation so far.
I I, I was just thinking in the context of, of threats of,
of the ability for these projects
to respond to environmental threats.
Yeah. Uh, we are, you know,
living in a climate change world when we travel
around the Pacific, this is one
of the things they always talk to us about,
ex existential threat of, of climate change.
Um, and when we do look at generally at, at threats
that are, uh, more conflict orientated, you can kind
of see them bubbling away, uh, for, for a while,
but sometimes these things just happen all of a sudden.
And we are looking at kind of long term, um, kind
of midterm projects like for example, moving over
to Australia and pathway for them.
How are, how easy, uh, will these projects respond to,
like disaster relief, humanitarian aid, uh,
with a particular focus on the Pacific
Start, Sheila? Yeah.
So, um, I think, you know, the projects
that very clearly have, um, high utility, um,
the C one 30 J, um, you know, that delivers an aircraft
with more load capacity, um, than the, than its predecessor.
Um, and, you know, great ability to get into tight
and difficult airfields, um, the Maritime Fleet Review will,
um, which is projected,
but we are looking at, you know, how do we project
into the Pacific better, both in terms of, um,
gaining access to information quickly.
So, um, uh, so better situational understanding,
understanding is a disaster unfolds,
but then how do we get, uh, New Zealand
assets there quickly?
Um, and that's just not military assets, but aid.
Um, so, you know, keeping the Canterbury,
the vessel Canterbury running
until we replace it perhaps in the mid thirties
is gonna be very important.
Um, you know,
commander control systems will be very important in
disasters because obviously, you know, your civilian, uh,
networks will be likely to be impaired.
Um, so our ability to get into the Pacific with aid
and help, I think will be,
and then understand what's going on, will be the key, these
Projects. And, and just
to that agility point, um,
and talking earlier about the NDAs, uh,
and technology does move really, really quickly, um,
have you factored that in, in terms
of movement of technology?
So if something happens, you can
kind of switch it up a little
Bit. Most of our
large platforms in the,
in the defense capability plan, looking forward,
our large platforms will have upgrades provisioned for,
so we can, a lot of these, um, systems, you know,
we we're almost buying into a club, so, you know,
you upgrade is like your, I find upgrades,
we'll upgrade our systems as, as that technology develops,
and we do it together with our partners.
And, and just one, one last thing around interoperability,
um, and, and I get the point around ensuring
that we are interop, so you can plug and move quickly,
but is there a point where, um, where you can become un,
un inoperable if the tired of
what partners are doing is not in line
with what we want to do?
So, sorry. Yeah, no, you go. That's fine.
Um, sovereignty is key.
So yeah, we, you don't, um,
we don't buy into interoperability
and lose sovereign decision making.
Um, that's really important, you know, with new technologies
so that we, you know, that we are using technologies
that we are ethically comfortable with
and that our, our government is comfortable with.
But also in terms of, you know, some, um,
interoperability efforts with our partners are just
so expensive, we can't afford to go there.
So we need to make really clear on decisions.
Interoperability, um, is important and essential,
but where it adds value
and it shouldn't add, there's a bit of burden to maintain,
uh, interoperable systems,
but it shouldn't, um, you know, overburden us to the point
where we, you know, can't make good self decisions.
Thank you. Finish your als.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, my question is around the ability of New Zealand
to be defense ready
and the context of the job cuts
that have happened, but also training.
So I understand at the end of July, it was confirmed
that 281 civilian staff roles would be disestablished,
but there was a piece in the post this morning
as well talking about the fact that the canceling of
exercises reducing Air Force flying hours
and Navy days at sea, slowing the recruitment
of new personnel and taking voluntary redundancies point
of hasn't been sufficient to close the deficit.
So it's a question, not just,
Sorry.
Um, Mr.
Chair, I just wonder if we can stick to the, um,
major reports that we've got. We,
We, it's about capacity to
Exactly, sorry, point, points of water hearing in silence.
Um, we are varying into areas that,
that we would need the secretary
and the chief of defense to answer.
If it's about, um, the, the personnel aspect of capability.
This is about delivering projects,
Speaking to the point of order, they did bring out the
issues of workforce in the introduction, but I do have
What said as relevant
and it's key to being able to deliver the key projects. So
Yeah, so the key thrust of today's briefing is
around defense major projects.
So yes, in the context of that,
you can ask the question potentially around some
of the other Mr.
Chair, they must link to the major
Projects. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, so in the context
of delivering the major projects, um, my question is
around whether there's sufficient capacity as well
as sufficient training,
or whether you are seeing that you are having to pull
that back and potentially forward looking, having to pull
that back in a way that would be detrimental
to the major projects.
Um, you talk About the military
Stuff. Yeah. So from
an NZ dev perspective, um,
we are, as I said in my open incomes, we are very aware
that, um, there's a broad range
of priorities across government and, you know, and money
and resource is uh, tied.
Um, so we've made prioritization decisions
to manage our budget,
but still allow us then the, uh, capacity
to invest going forward.
Um, within the defense capability plan, there is investments
for people, um, infrastructure
and those other elements that combined to make a,
a project into a military capability.
Um, and from that, we've got an integrated investment plan
going forward where we consider all of those aspects so
that we can synchronize
and deliver capabilities as promised
nows from Tim Costley and from Tim. How, how
Does that impact compare with, say the,
the really high attrition we saw 21, 22, 23 people being
taken away from these major projects to do things like, uh,
guarding MIQ facilities.
And, and in your report here that we are looking at today,
you talk about and to baseline twice, um,
in AI network Army during the last, um,
say six years before the election.
H how, how does this compare with those challenges to
Major? I'll make a couple
of quick comments from an NZD
perspective, then I'll hand over to Sarah.
Um, so our attrition rates have, um,
you know, stabilized decline.
Well, um, we still have a shortage of, uh,
skilled people in the middle ranks, um, which is, uh,
forcing us to, you know, really prioritize hard.
We are looking at ways where we can utilize people
with significant military experience to populate projects,
allowing our younger personnel to focus on training
and bringing, uh, new capabilities in into service,
you know, via, you know, exercises and operations.
Sarah. Yeah, I'll just add that, um,
while Matt's talked a lot about the military skill shortage,
um, you will appreciate that IT specialists also very, um,
well sought after in New Zealand.
So network engineers, software engineers, cyber specialists.
So one of the risks that we are focused on into the future
with the defense capability plan is making sure that we can,
um, recruit sufficient
of these people without competing across government.
So we have to find a way to get these people in without, um,
making it difficult for everyone else.
The other comment is that the integrated project teams
that we run, which are specialists, um,
project management commercial
and NCDF expertise are very small.
We run very lean compared
to other countries around the world.
Um, so we are able
to run these IPTs very successfully with small numbers of people.
Okay. Stuff on that.
Um, you were, you were talking earlier around unmanned,
uh, vessels, unmanned vehicles and stuff like that.
Does that mean less jobs just to, and,
and if so, is there a Yeah.
What, what's, what's the strategy of it if it is?
The general finding and finding within crewed systems is
your workforce size doesn't necessarily change,
but they change what they do.
So UNC crewed systems typically give you the ability
to use a machine rather than a person somewhere
where it's dirty, dangerous or boring,
or you need just them to stay out there for a long time.
But then you need a workforce in behind it to assess
the information it's sending back, uh,
to maintain control of it.
Um, so you tend to see a workforce maybe shifts emphasis,
but it doesn't necessarily reduce.
Okay. Start from Lauren.
Oh, Um, thank you. So thinking about the staff
and the workforce, and you talked about there are some
forecasted potential gaps and shortages.
Um, the private sector obviously pays a lot more
for quite a lot of these, and you've got like, um,
a DF doing a bit of a campaign to recruit some
of our our team in that space.
Um, what is the plan, um,
to retain the staff that you have currently with
that capability and to also attract them over?
And that possibly is probably more for you.
That's, I think it's another NZD question, not, uh,
aligned to our integrated investment plan.
We also, um, uh, finalizing a workforce strategy that talks
to, uh, attraction, it talks to retention, um,
maybe a more agile, uh, system of, um, of,
uh, managing skill.
Um, and then we're also working on, um,
I guess I'd call it the supply side of that.
So how the investments
and people unfold so that we're, uh, developing
and delivering people into our organization at the right
time to actually utilize military capabilities.
So looking forward, we're looking at a much more integrated,
uh, suite of plans, which includes workforce. Thank you.
Um, just had a final question before we wrap up.
Appreciate we're at time now, um, in relation
to risk appetite, and we've seen obviously through this
and previous reports that timeframes can be quite generous
for different projects, and I understand that in the context
of being in a relatively low risk,
although threat environment I should say, and
therefore the benefit of taking more time to get it right,
being a higher priority.
Um, but in a more nuanced situation like we see now
where there is a more, uh,
or I guess a tighter timeframe
around potentially delivering some of these capabilities,
how do we manage that risk appetite
around making decisions quickly
versus potentially getting some wrong,
but actually acting now to deliver capability?
And where are we on that spectrum?
Oh, look, we've, um, both MOD
and NCDF, uh, just adopted a, um,
a framework I guess we,
we call the minimum viable, uh, capability.
So, um, you know, you talk how we used to trade schedule for
cost and scope, um,
now the minimum viable capability view is what can we get
that's good enough, but fast within schedule.
So we're now trying to hold schedule constant, um,
manage the cost, and if we have
to scale back a little on scope, then we do so.
Um, so we, we, we'll go
for an 80% solution on time rather than 105% solution in
five years, which is possibly something a lot
of mil like militaries have been guilty
of over recent times.
Okay. All right. Thank you very, very much for your time.
Appreciate it.
Another hour.
Oh,
We have Orion Health And
As our first submitter for today.
Morning, Andrew. Is it?
Yeah, that's right, please. Great to see.
Cool. Good to be here.
Excellent. All right. Thanks for your time this morning.
And so the committee's been doing an ongoing piece
of work in relation to the impact on non tariff barriers.
Yeah. And we've been particularly interested in how
that impacts the tech sector
and uh, obviously from your unique perspective, we're keen
to hear directly commercially how
that impacts whether there are impacts in some of the areas
that government may be able to look at adapting processes
to support, uh, industry growth.
Yeah. Cool. So over to you, Andrew. Great.
Well thank you, um, for the opportunity to appear today.
Um, so I'm Andrew Bywater from,
um, representing Orion Health.
Um, so we're a homegrown digital health company,
uh, with global Reach.
Um, so we've been building software
for the healthcare systems around the world, uh,
for the last 30 years.
Um, we probably do come with a,
a slightly different angle than what you might expect
around, um, non tariff barriers, um, in particularly, um,
the issues we see.
Um, so we've been working from Auckland to Alberta
to Albuquerque, um,
but across 15 countries, the uk, Canada, us, uh,
the Middle East, Saudi Arabia, Abu Dhabi, um, France, Spain.
So we do, we do the software
for health systems across the world.
Um, the New Zealand health tech sector, though, um,
it's actually evolved, um, into quite a,
a robust industry now.
It's valued according to a report last year,
about $2.1 billion.
And a lot of that is Fisher and ourselves and admittedly,
but there are about 200 companies, um,
that work in medical devices, uh, digital health solutions,
information technology.
So we're specifically a software company though.
Um, and so there are a lot of other small companies though,
with cool ideas being nurtured here.
Um, but what we need is actually the home market, um,
to be our launch pad for exports.
And that is probably, um,
what I'm gonna talk mostly about today.
Um, so it's not so much about export wins,
but what's holding that next generation of companies, um,
from growing is actually, um,
what's happening at home more than
what we see happening here, more than necessarily overseas.
So if you see there's been a lot of attention
around things like tariffs in the US
or for software companies that, that hasn't affected us yet,
um, I say yet.
Um, but, and hopefully that remains the same.
And when it comes to tax systems
and that these, there's complexities,
but it's fairly straightforward when, you know,
we've been doing this for a long time.
Um, but as I say, uh, our biggest barrier
that we've seen has actually been local
procurement here in New Zealand.
Um, so it's a bit of a shocking fact
that we've found it easier to win business
and the likes of Canada to the uk, Saudi Arabia, uh,
than it is to get a pilot off the ground
here, um, these days.
Um, and that is, while it sounds a little bit absurd,
that is a bit of the reality that we face.
So Orion Health started in the health sector, um,
roughly about 25 years ago.
Um, so it was already doing software,
but, uh, found a niche there.
Um, and it was a small $50,000 project in counties Manco.
Um, and, and basically an idea
and using an innovation fund there at counties
Manco District Health Board.
Um, and we essentially grew by approving local results.
We could deliver results locally
and then, um, used that as a springboard.
So, and used our New Zealand Inc.
We get given a go around the world.
Um, and having that credibility
of those small projects here enabled us.
That was the, the real thing we needed as a launchpad
to secure investment
and become attractive, um, to international markets.
Unfortunately, what we've seen now in the last few years is
that's procurement here, particularly with government,
has become actually the biggest domestic barrier to scale
for software companies.
Um, so without a strong home market,
it's actually been much harder to grow offshore.
Um, and we, we are confident enough,
and we've been around long enough that we,
we don't mind putting our heads up about
the power pit to say this.
Um, but I know a lot
of other small players in the New Zealand software
sector do have found this.
And this is not just in the last little while.
This has been happening for 25 years now, 20 years.
Um, and that, that's, um, an issue.
So, um, it's much harder to grow offshore if you haven't got
that strong base here.
And unfortunately, that means also things like
what we did in counties, Manco don't tend to happen
because you end up with risk aversion
and rigid panels that favor, frankly, the big players,
the Microsoft sales forces
and whatnot who are unfortunately foreign.
So the small New Zealand outfits
often don't even get a chance.
So we're always told to punch above our weight.
Um, but we don't actually let people step into the
room at times.
Um, so as I say, we need, we need like Orion wouldn't be
where it is without having those small projects
to kick us off, you know, 25 years ago.
Um, so often, you know, while there may be cool
ideas happening out there, you know,
you really need a solid cash flow
and a solid bunch of projects that you can then take
to the world to show, Hey, look,
we've been given a chance on our home patch
and we've proven ourselves, we've done something good
and here's what we'd like to do with you.
But too often we, um, we see companies having
to explain why, uh, we're on the back foot saying,
explaining why we haven't been given a go at home
and why, you know, why, why we should be
given a go overseas.
So we see here local companies stifled, um,
and forced to almost to go offshore to prove themselves.
And unfortunately a bit of a, a culture here
of playing it safe and going with the big safe ones.
You know, it's, it used
to be saying you never lose your job if you choose
IBM or Microsoft.
And that, that tends to be where, how we've ended up.
Now people often and agencies here playing it safe.
And unfortunately there is the,
I would say the tall poppy element too,
when companies like ourselves, you know, we've, we've um,
had a lot of support from NZTE done work with Callahan.
Um, they've still sponsor some of our internships.
Uh, NBIE do great work.
Um, but often when you put your hand up
and ask for that support, then you can
be attacked for that as well.
Um, so the r and e end up on a list or being published, uh,
and the media love to um, say, oh, this,
this company's getting that as well.
So we get this sort of this dual modality almost there,
where, you know, you wanna encourage all this,
but then also you get attacked for it.
Um, and the big kick is probably all the
government procurement panels.
Um, there are actually probably a higher barrier than
anything we've seen overseas.
Um, um, if you don't make a panel
and all the government procurement panel,
you really got no chance.
So, um, and you have to beg for anything, literally beg
for anything like that small $50,000 project
that kicked us off about 25 years ago in healthcare.
Um, and the problem with the panels is
that the best case scenario you can do is apply
to be on one every few years,
but once the panels are established,
they get evergreen status.
And so, um, right now
for if tech business providing services
and the, say the, all the government consultancies, um,
there's actually no timeline for that to be opened up
'cause it is evergreen and they can read the, the,
the official line we got while the panel is closed.
Now a new providers NZ GB GP is in the process
of undertaking a strategic review of the panel,
the re press process
and contractual frameworks as it currently stands.
There are no timelines in place,
but when a go to market process may happen,
but once it's been decided we'll be in touch short, um,
our reef pressure, that panel was last
undertaken five years ago.
Mm-hmm. So, which, you know,
for the tech industry when we're moving rapidly all the
time, that's just too slow.
Mm-hmm. Um, so one of the, one
of the most valuable things we need
for an exporting business is dependable cash flow.
Um, so we need to have government processes that enable
and nimble procurement to pick up the best providers,
pick up cool things that are happening here, um,
not just wait for the next time you're gonna gonna
do the five year review.
Um, and let me say like
where New Zealand government spends its money
has an amplifying effect.
Um, but right now we don't feel it's set up right to amplify
software companies like ourselves.
Um, and yes, there are dispensations, that's true,
but in reality that's a huge barrier.
Um, it puts many entities just looking outside the panel,
particularly in this current climate.
So something we think makes sense as a basic principle, um,
was at a minimum have a level playing field for GCF
and overseas suppliers.
So kiwi companies are treated the same
as overseas companies.
So we have those doors open so when the IT
procurement processes happen,
we feel like we're actually got an opportunity to bid
and then we can leverage that ourselves to go to market
and we can use the support
of the NZT and that to go out there.
Um, so some examples of that, um,
we've seen where we you to, to sign agreements
with certain agencies, you have to allow your,
your cost models to be fully audited.
I can't imagine PWC
and um, Microsoft to don't necessarily having those, um,
contracts, those stipulations being put into this.
Maybe they are. Um,
but that's certainly something we've seen also.
Um, another stifling factor there is local vendors.
Um, you have to agree with some agencies,
health New Zealand, to, to any IP that's developed
by you on working on that project as owned by them.
So we actually have to give up our IP rides,
um, to stuff we've worked on.
And that doesn't mean that that's regardless if they've had
any involvement in the development or design of that ip.
So again, we remain on that back foot.
So it's unfair, counterproductive from our point of view,
uh, and signals to innovators
that you're actually better off going offshore.
Okay. So quite simple.
Um, we're not asking
for handouts though we're particularly special treatments.
It's a really a level playing field,
but is what we think we do do the most
for software companies to set them up for success.
So procure, like we believe in ourselves,
let kiwi companies pilots scale things
and build solutions up here, get a cashflow established
so then when they go to market they can get going.
Mm-hmm. Um,
and I think, think beyond export promotion, um,
we made a bit of a joke in the office the other day
actually, uh, that NZT does such a great job offshore.
It would be great to have them around advocating
for domestically, um, for New Zealand companies, uh, as well
to champion innovation.
Um, because really we need
that steady domestic revenue to be able to launch.
So best you can give any, uh,
advantage you give any tech business is credible,
referenceable, cash flow stable on markets
and that's, that's really what we, we look for.
Awesome. Alright, well thank you very much for,
and there's some really valid points there I think in terms
of looking to try
And enable domestic economic activity.
Uh, you know, and this would apply across other industries
as well, I'm, I'm sure, but certainly in your
industry it's a relevant area.
Um, and in terms of what this committee's looking at, um,
it is specifically on yeah, offshore piece.
And there were a couple aspects though that you raised
that I wanted to, um, pick up on from that.
And you'd said it was difficult at times to go
to market if you hadn't had the opportunity
to demonstrate a track record domestically.
So is that something that many markets are
requiring or wanting to see?
Is proof of work done in your home location
before they'll award
Contracts? I I mean, that's not the end
of the
world if you don't have that.
Okay. But it certainly makes it a hell of a lot easier.
And so from our experience,
just having those referenceable examples certainly helped.
And, you know, we see ourselves, you know,
being well established as having a bit of a role, um,
but to support, um, our peers and,
and smaller ups uh, startups.
Um, and you know, a lot
of those people who've done
startups have come out of our business.
So we do feel a bit of a, a role in helping them and,
and we know, yes, they might still go and win business.
Um, I can think of a couple that companies
that have done okay overseas
and particularly in the Middle East and been given a go,
but you're starting on the back foot
and it would be a hell of a lot easier if we were able to
leverage something that we've done here
and to be able to point to that
and say, Hey, look, this was awesome.
Here's some tangible examples. Yeah.
So with those, um, pitches then, are there any scenarios
where you might have done work in a particular country
that significantly improves your likelihood
of getting a contract in another country?
Yeah, sure. I mean,
so particularly the work we've done in the US over the last
15 to 20 years, we've been able to re reference that into,
um, the Middle East in particular.
They take a lot of guidance
where we follow a lot of them the way they operate.
Um, particularly the work we've done with the NHS
that's referenced into Canada and vice versa.
Um, and same with Australia and ourselves.
So some of the work we've done here, those,
those early kickoff projects were able, enabled us
to really start with that credibility
and say, Hey, look, here's something
tangible that we've done.
Um, so being that, you know, working here for 25 years or so
and having our clinical portal in almost every hospital in
New Zealand is something we, we are able
to still leverage to this day.
Okay. And you touched on NZTE being, um,
quite effective Yeah.
Encouraging you here. Can you just give us perhaps a
bit more context around that?
Are there particular aspects that they are doing really well
to support the industry or, or any of that conversely or not
and perhaps the level of knowledge
or understanding within NZT of
Y? Yeah, so I mean,
a great example is, I mean, it's, it's,
I guess it's a bit of that soft touch diplomacy,
if you will, and, and opening doors up, um,
particularly in places like the Middle East, Europe,
um, and Asia.
Um, we certainly see the benefit of having the,
the fern mark that we use proudly.
Uh, and, and having EZTE
and the trade commissioners out there opening doors
and looking to host events, do things with us
just gives us that level of credibility.
And I think there's an appreciation, you know,
the New Zealand, new Zealand's got a good reputation in the
world, um, so they're able to leverage that, I suppose
with their, with their contacts and whatnot out there
and able to open doors for us.
And that almost having that, that nod
and acknowledgement, um,
from the New Zealand agency we find very helpful.
Mm-hmm. Um, so an example of that, we've got a delegation,
um, this week coming from Saudi Arabia,
which NCTE has helped facilitate.
So there's ongoing partnership work
that we do with them all the time.
Excellent. All right. Any final questions for Andrew?
Maybe very briefly. Um, fascinating.
And do you have kind of a best practice example of a country
who both, um, encourages that domestic innovation
but has still got the doors open
and does it Well, I mean,
you've talked about Middle East and
Canada. Is it one of those?
Yeah, Canada, uh, Canada, I mean, it's, it's funny the,
we won a project there covering 15 million people, um,
in Ontario, and
that's probably the most robust
procurement we've ever been through.
Mm-hmm. Um, and literally the, the Ministry
of Healthcare gets peer reviewed
by their treasury for all their work.
So it's, it's not like it's an open, say this sort of thing.
Um, but, um, they, they're really clear in terms of
what they want in terms
of local engagement that we have to do.
So we have local partners there. Mm-hmm.
Um, they're really open about their expectations in terms
of the work we need to do on the ground, uh,
particularly in Ontario with their indigenous communities,
um, and, and having contacts in with them.
That's been a huge part of that.
But it's really clear and really straightforward what,
what's expected of you, what to do in that market.
And, um, we've, we've found them really great
to work with. Yeah.
Excellent. Hey, thank you so much for coming in, Andrew.
Thank you. Really appreciate your insights
and uh, some good challenges there for us. Cool.
Thank you very much. Alright. Cheers.